\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename etrack.info
@settitle ETRACK
@paragraphindent 0
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@c Copyright (C) 2002-2009, 2011 Thien-Thi Nguyen
@c This file is part of ETRACK, released under GNU GPL with
@c ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.  See the file COPYING for details.

@ifinfo
This file documents the ETRACK program.

Copyright 2002-2009, 2011 Thien-Thi Nguyen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
@end ifinfo

@c  This title page illustrates only one of the
@c  two methods of forming a title page.

@titlepage
@title ETRACK Manual
@author Thien-Thi Nguyen

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002-2009, 2011 Thien-Thi Nguyen

Published by Thien-Thi Nguyen

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage

@contents

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ETRACK

This document describes how to setup and use ETRACK, a package to track
expenses: query, add, delete, update.

This document applies to ETRACK @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Setup::               Preparing to use ETRACK.
* Session::             Using ETRACK.
* Diary Import::        Another way to use ETRACK.
* Maintenance::         Administering ETRACK.
* Design::              Innards of ETRACK.
* License::             Your rights and freedoms.

* Index::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Setup
@chapter Setup
@cindex  Setup

Setting up to use ETRACK can be viewed as more fun than actually using it,
depending on your particular proclivities.  After installing ETRACK, you need
to create a configuration file, and arrange for ETRACK users to set their
@code{ETRACK_CONFIG} environment variable to point to this file.

If someone else has already taken care of these things for you, feel free to
skip to the next chapter which explains how to use ETRACK (@pxref{Session}).

@menu
* Configuration file::
* Database setup::
* Environment::
* Customization::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Configuration file
@section Configuration file
@cindex  Configuration file

This section documents the configuration file, which is at the heart of the
ETRACK setup.  The file contains directives describing the configuration name,
which backend database to use, the expense attributes, and various flavors of
queries.  Directives have the form of Scheme expressions with the @code{car}
the name of the directive.

Comments begin with semicolon (@code{;}) and go to the end of the line.
Additionally, you can comment-out a directive by quoting it with single quote
before the opening parenthesis.

The examples under this section are all taken from the example configuration
file, which you might find easier to peruse directly, with the shell command
@code{etrack --display-example-config}.

@menu
* socket directory::
* name and database::
* attributes::
* query::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       socket directory
@subsection socket directory
@cindex     directive, sockdir

The @code{sockdir} names the directory where the PostgreSQL database
keeps its connection socket (typically named @file{.s.PGSQL.5432}).
This should be an absolute filename.  For example:

@example
(sockdir . "/usr/local/var/etrack")
@end example

@xref{Maintenance}, for how to set this value when migrating the
database from one cluster to another.

@strong{NB}: For now, this directive is optional.  However, in the ETRACK
release after 2011-05-01, it will be mandatory.  Update your configuration
file as soon as possible to avoid surprises later!

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       name and database
@subsection name and database
@cindex     directive, name
@cindex     directive, database

The @code{name} is a for-human-consumption string that identifies the
configuration, while the @code{database} is the name of the PostgreSQL
database used to actually keep the data.  The database name is not quoted.
For example:

@example
(name     . "Example Expenses")
(database . etrack_example)
@end example

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       attributes
@subsection attributes
@cindex     directive, attributes

The @code{attributes} directive defines the attributes which, in turn, define
the attribute codes (also known as "attcodes").  Because attcodes are basically
the first letters of the attribute names, you need to be somewhat careful not
to define overlapping names.  For example:

@example
(attributes . (vehicle
               household
               food
               utilities
               entertainment
               rent
               misc
               insurance))
@end example

Here, the attcodes would be v, h, f, u, e, r, m and i.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       query
@subsection query
@cindex     directive, query

There are several flavors of query: simple, drill-down and custom.  The first
two rely solely on the attribute codes.  By default, a simple query is created
for each of the attributes, so you don't have to define them yourself.

@subsubsection Simple Query
@cindex query, simple
@cindex simple query
The simple query has the form:

@example
(query . (simple "DESCRIPTION" QUERY-CODE))
(query . (simple-list "DESC-1" Q-CODE-1 "DESC-2" Q-CODE-2 ...))
@end example

where @var{QUERY-CODE} is "!!" for "all", or a series of attribute codes which
are ANDed together.  If an attribute code is prefixed with "!", its sense is
inverted.  The @var{DESCRIPTIONS} are short strings that describe the query,
and may include embedded spaces.  For example:

@example
(query . (simple-list
          "all"                 !!
          "all no rent"         !r
          "eating out"          fe
          "fun not food"        e!f
          "food not fun"        f!e
          ))
@end example

@subsubsection Drill-Down Query
@cindex query, drill-down
@cindex drill-down query
The drill-down query has the form:

@example
(query . (drill-down ATTRIBUTE (DETAILS ...)))
(query . (drill-down-list CAT-1 (DET-1 ...) CAT-2 (DET-2 ...) ...))
@end example

where @var{ATTRIBUTE} is one of the defined attributes.  @var{DETAILS} is a
list of strings that are searched in the first two slots of the @code{details}
field.  The description for the query is formed like so: "ATTRIBUTE / DETAIL".
For example:

@example
(query . (drill-down-list

          utilities ("cable"
                     "sdge"
                     "phone")

          vehicle ("gas"
                   "car"
                   "moto"
                   "bike")))
@end example

@subsubsection Custom Query
@cindex query, custom
@cindex custom query
Lastly, the custom query has the form:

@example
(query . (custom "DESCRIPTION" QUERY-THUNK))
@end example

where @var{QUERY-THUNK} is a Scheme procedure that takes no arguments and must
finish with a query using either @code{select}
(@pxref{Single-Table Abstraction, select, Guile-PG, guile-pg, Guile-PG}),
or @code{one-row-table-query}.

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} one-row-table-query labels vals
Return a result comprising two rows formed from @var{labels} and @var{vals}.
This object satisfies @code{pg-result?}.
@end deffn

You can use @code{one-row-table-query} to present arbitrary data in a way that
etrack understands.  For example:

@example
(query . (custom "sum of numbers from 0-10"
                 (lambda ()
                   (one-row-table-query
                    `(,@@(iota 11) sum)
                    `(,@@(iota 11) ,(apply + (iota 11))))))))
@end example

The order of the query directives is preserved in the query menu during
ETRACK operation (@pxref{Query command}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Database setup
@section Database setup
@cindex  Database setup

This section lists various shell commands to accomplish database related
tasks.  Of primary importance in setup phase is creating a database and
granting users access to it.  Before you do that, make sure the configuration
file has at least the @code{database} field specified (@pxref{Configuration
file}).

Creating a new database and initializing it:

@example
etrack -b initdb
@end example

Granting access to a user:

@example
etrack -b grant USER
@end example

Revoking access from a user:

@example
etrack -b revoke USER
@end example

@xref{Maintenance}, for commands to use once ETRACK has been set up and
is in regular use.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Environment
@section Environment
@cindex  Environment

The last setup step is to set the environment variable @var{ETRACK_CONFIG} to
point to the the configuration file you created or modified, as described in
the previous section (@pxref{Configuration file}).  Supposing you name this
file /etc/etrack/cherry-lane.config, the following would work for Bourne shell
and variants:

@example
ETRACK_CONFIG=/etc/etrack/cherry-lane.config
export ETRACK_CONFIG
@end example

And for csh and variants:

@example
setenv ETRACK_CONFIG /etc/etrack/cherry-lane.config
@end example

These fragments should be added to the appropriate shell initialization file
for each user who is to have access to this configuration, or to the system
shell initialization file if for all users.

To specify more than one configuration file, separate each filename with a
colon.  For example:

@example
ETRACK_CONFIG=/etc/etrack/c1:/etc/etrack/c2:/etc/etrack/c3
@end example

This example (in Bourne shell syntax) specifies three files @file{c1},
@file{c2} and @file{c3}, all in directory @file{/etc/etrack}.

Another environment variable that the @file{etrack} executable consults is
@code{EMACS}.  If unset, or if it has the value @code{t} (commonly the case
when running ETRACK as a subprocess of Emacs), the default value is taken to
be simply ``emacs''.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Customization
@section Customization
@cindex  Customization

When ETRACK starts, it looks for file @code{~/.etrack.el} and loads it.  This
allows you to customize the behavior of ETRACK (somewhat) and Emacs (more so).
Here is a complete example:

@example
;;; ~/.etrack.el --- configure the ETRACK user interface

(set-language-environment "Latin-1")

(blink-cursor-mode -1)
(fringe-mode 0)

(when (and window-system (member "etrack" command-line-args))
  (set-face-background 'default "darkgreen")
  (set-face-foreground 'default "cyan")
  (set-face-foreground 'mode-line "white")
  (set-face-background 'mode-line "black"))

;;; ~/.etrack.el ends here
@end example

This first sets the language environment so that @code{toggle-input-method}
(normally bound to @kbd{C-\}) works without asking you for the default input
method; then continues to set up the display.

The expression @code{(member "etrack" command-line-args)} is true when ETRACK
is started from the shell, and false when started with @samp{M-x etrack RET}
in an already running Emacs session.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Session
@chapter Session
@cindex  Session

There are two ways to start ETRACK:

@itemize
@item with the shell command @code{etrack}

A variant is @code{etrack -nw}.
If you are using a windowing system, this command starts
ETRACK in the current window instead of creating another one
(@code{nw} stands for @dfn{no window system}).

@item by typing @code{M-x etrack} into Emacs

If there is an already-active session, this simply selects the ETRACK
buffer instead of starting a new session.  In this case, Emacs also
displays @samp{(Resuming already-active session)} in the echo area.
@end itemize

@cindex Main menu
If you have more than one configuration specified, ETRACK
asks you to choose one of them.  After this is decided,
ETRACK clears the screen and displays the main menu:

@example
Welcome to ETRACK for NAME!
Please report bugs to ttn.

=== Page 1 ===

Choose a command by typing a number or letter:

 (1) query

 (2) add
 (3) delete
 (4) update
 (5) prune duplicates

 (t) add using template
 (T) edit templates

 (c) calendar
 (m) mail session log
 (a) about this program

 (x) export data
 (v) view mode

 (q) quit

Your choice:
@end example

Here, @code{NAME} is the name given in the configuration file referenced by
the @code{ETRACK_CONFIG} env var (@pxref{Environment}).

Type 1, 2, 3 or 4, to query, add, delete, or update expense entries; or 5 to
prune (possible) duplicate expense entries; or one of the other letters in
parentheses to work with templates,
see a calendar, mail this session log to someone, read some
news about ETRACK, go into View Mode,
export data,
or quit.  You do not need to type @key{RET}
after this letter.

@menu
* Query command::
* Add command::
* Delete command::
* Update command::
* Prune duplicates command::
* Template commands::
* Calendar display command::
* Mail session log command::
* About this program command::
* Export Data command::
* View mode::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Query command
@section Query command
@cindex  Query command

The Query command is used to query the database and display the result.

ETRACK displays the query menu.  Select one by typing the number associated
with the query description, and then @key{RET}.
ETRACK displays the results and
goes into View mode (@pxref{View mode}) so that you can examine the query or
ask for a monthly breakdown, if applicable.

The query menu is formed by listing those queries defined in the configuration
file (@pxref{Configuration file}), followed by the "standard queries", which
are:

@itemize
@item attributes -- Each attribute becomes a query.
@item "(possible duplicates)" -- Show entries that have the same date and
amount.  The other fields of each pair of possible duplicates are not taken
into account; it is up to you to determine whether or not a pair represents a
bonafide duplicate, and what to do about it (@pxref{Prune duplicates command}).
@end itemize

If you specify a query that doesn't exist, ETRACK reports an error, but goes
into View mode anyway.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Add command
@section Add command
@cindex  Add command

The Add command is used to add an expense entry.

ETRACK prompts you for an amount, a date, one or more attribute codes, and zero
or more details; adds this entry upon confirmation; then loops.  To quit out
of the loop, type @key{RET} when asked for the amount.
To save typing, you can use
@code{M-p} and @code{M-n} to select and edit previous entries.

When specifying the attribute, you only need to type the first letter of its
name.  ETRACK expands and displays the full name for you automatically.  Use
@code{DEL} to erase mistakes.  Use @code{?} to display the list of available
attributes.

Normally, there are no default values, except for the date, which is
@dfn{today}, in @code{YYYY-MM-DD} format.  You can specify a group of default
values by selecting a template (@pxref{Template commands}), and edit the
values further prior to confirmation.

@subsection Restart
During entry, you may wish to change the value of a previously-entered (and
exited) field.  To restart, type @kbd{C-r}.  The previously-entered values are
used as the default.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Delete command
@section Delete command
@cindex  Delete command

The Delete command is used to delete an expense entry.

ETRACK prompts you for an entry index number and deletes that entry, no
questions asked; then loops.  To quit out of the loop, type @key{RET} alone.
You
can find out an entry's index number by looking at the first column of a query
(@pxref{Query command}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Update command
@section Update command
@cindex  Update command

The Update command is used to modify one or more expense entries.  The precise
mechanism depends on whether or not there are marked entries (@pxref{View
mode}).  If no entries are marked, update is done one entry at a time.
Otherwise, the marked entries can be edited and updated more or less in
parallel.

@menu
* Updating one entry at a time::
* Updating marked entries::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       Updating one entry at a time
@subsection Updating one entry at a time

ETRACK asks for an entry index number and retrieves that entry for update.
For each field, ETRACK allows you to edit the current value.  To save typing,
you can use @code{M-p} and @code{M-n} to select and edit previous entries.
When you are done, ETRACK asks for confirmation and updates that entry.

Note that the @code{details} field must be in the form of a list of strings.
For example, if the desired details are:

@itemize
@item movie
@item One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
@end itemize

Then, this must be entered into ETRACK like so:

@example
("movie" "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest")
@end example

If the original entry did not have any details, this will be shown as
@code{nil}.  We will probably hide this implementation detail in a future
version of ETRACK.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       Updating marked entries
@subsection Updating marked entries

ETRACK shows the marked entries in a special format and goes into a recursive
editing mode.  In this mode, @kbd{TAB} moves to the next @dfn{editable field},
circling around to the top at the bottom of the page.  If you try to modify
text outside an editable field, ETRACK signals a ``text-read-only'' error.

When you are done editing the contents of the entries, type @kbd{C-c C-c}.
What happens next depends on whether the entries were changed:

@itemize
@item If you do not change any entries (for example, by typing @kbd{C-c C-c}
immediately), ETRACK displays the message @samp{(No changes)}.

@item Otherwise, ETRACK updates the entries in the database then asks if you
would like to unmark the updated entries (thus saving you the trouble of
having to unmark those entries manually, later).
@end itemize

Regardless of the changes (or non-changes), ETRACK goes into View mode as the
last step.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Prune duplicates command
@section Prune duplicates command
@cindex  Prune duplicates command

The Prune duplicates command is used to examine and prune (possible) duplicate
entries.  @xref{Query command}, for the "(possible duplicates)" query.

ETRACK computes the list of possible duplicates (may take a few seconds) and
displays the count of pairs.  For each pair, starting with the most recent,
ETRACK displays the pair and goes into Prune mode.  To get out of Prune mode,
type @code{q}.

Here is a table of keys and what they do in Prune mode:

@table @kbd

@item 1
Prune the first entry of the pair.

@item 2
Prune the second entry of the pair.

@item SPC
Skip to the next pair.

@item q
Quit out of Prune mode.

@end table

After Prune mode, ETRACK displays the number of entries deleted, and goes into
View mode (@pxref{View mode}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Template commands
@section Template commands
@cindex  TEmplate commands

A @dfn{template} is a partially completed entry that can be used to initialize
new entries.  Unlike normal entries which have a numeric
identification number, each tempate has a unique @dfn{name}, instead.  Another
difference is that fields may be left unspecified, also known as @dfn{having a
NULL value}.

From the main menu you can add using a template (selecting one if none are
currently selected) as well as edit the available templates.

@menu
* Add Using Template command::
* Editing templates::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       Add Using Template command
@subsection Add Using Template command
@cindex     Add Using Template command

The Add Using Template command sets the @dfn{current template} and
collects entries to add using it.  You can also add without any template
(@pxref{Add command}).
ETRACK lists the available templates,
one per line, and you type in a name to select one of them.

When a template is selected, its name is shown next to the menu item for the
Add Using Template command in double-quotes, and is the default choice for the
next time this command is invoked.

Like the Add command, you can use @kbd{C-r} to restart an entry.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node       Editing templates
@subsection Editing templates
@cindex     Editing templates

The Edit templates command prompts you to choose a template to edit.  You can
type @key{TAB} to see a list of available template names, and also do
completion on partial input.  If you specify a name not in the list, a new
template will be created with that name.

There are two editing operations: delete and modify.  ETRACK first gives you
the option to delete the template.  If you decline deletion, it is assumed
that you wish to modify the template and ETRACK prompts you for values for
each of the fields: amount, date, attribute code, and details.  To leave a
field unspecified, simply delete all the text in the minibuffer (for example,
with @kbd{C-a} followed by @kbd{C-k}).

When the template has been either deleted or modified, ETRACK prompts for
another template to edit.  You can continue as above, or type @key{RET} to
finish editing.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Calendar display command
@section Calendar display command
@cindex  Calendar display command

The Calendar display command displays a calendar (wow!).

ETRACK prompts you for a month to display.  Type a month number, or a month
number followed by space followed by a year number, or just @key{RET} for the
current month.  ETRACK displays the requested month(s) and goes into View mode
(@pxref{View mode}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Mail session log command
@section Mail session log command
@cindex  Mail session log command

The Mail session log command mails the session log (up to and including the
Mail session log command) to someone.

ETRACK prompts you for a recipient for the mail, a subject line, and a short
one-line message; and uses this info to compose and send the email message.
Afterwards, ETRACK goes into View mode (@pxref{View mode}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    About this program command
@section About this program command
@cindex  About this program command

This command shows some information about ETRACK and goes into View mode
(@pxref{View mode}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Export Data command
@section Export Data command
@cindex  Export Data command

This command allows you to export data to a file in tab-separated format,
i.e., with a tab character between the fields @code{id}, @code{date},
@code{amount}, @code{attcode}, @code{details} (in that order), and also with a
tab character between each of the elements of @code{details}.  Other programs
can process this file format easily.

When invoked, ETRACK displays a small menu in the echo area:

@example
Source: (m) marked, (p) page, (d) date range, (a) all
@end example

The @samp{(m) marked} appears only if there are marked entries
(@pxref{View mode}).  Type one of the indicated letters to choose
the @dfn{source} of the export.  If you type @kbd{p}, ETRACK asks
for a page number; if @kbd{d}, a date range, which is specified like so:

@example
YYYY[-MM[-DD]],YYYY[-MM[-DD]]
@end example

You can also use a colon (@kbd{:}) instead of a comma.
Month and days are optional.

The first @code{YYYY-MM-DD} is the start date and the second, the end date.
If only one date is given (no comma or colon), then only entries from that
precise date are exported.  If the start date is omitted, it defaults to the
earliest date.  If the end date is omitted, it defaults to the latest date.

@heading NOTE
If you specify an end date of 2005 (for example), that stands for
@code{2005-01-01} and @emph{not} @code{2005-12-31}.  This behavior will
probably change prior to ETRACK 1.0 release to be more intuitive.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    View mode
@section View mode
@cindex  View mode

You can enter View mode from the main menu by typing @code{v}.  Also, some
commands enter View mode automatically before returning to the main menu.

When you are in View mode, you can move about the session log, all around the
current page, or even to previous pages (and back).  The current position is
marked by the cursor.  You can also scroll the screen left and right.

View mode is also used to @dfn{mark entries} (and unmark them, of course).  To
get out of View mode, type @code{q}.  Here is a table of keys and what they do
in View mode:

@table @kbd

@item SPC
Scroll the screen up a few lines to show text after the current position.

@item DEL
Scroll the screen down a few lines to show text before the current position.

@item [
Scroll the screen left a few columns to show text to the right of the current
position.

@item ]
Scroll the screen right a few columns to show text to the left of the current
position.

@item P
Go to the top of the current page or to the previous pages if already at the
top.  Note that this is an uppercase @code{P}.

@item N
Go to the top of the next page or to the bottom of the current page if already
at the last page.  Note that this is an uppercase @code{N}.

@item up
@itemx down
Move the cursor up or down one line, respectively.

@item RET
@itemx S-up
@itemx S-down
If the cursor is on a line with a valid entry, @key{RET} toggles whether or
not the entry is @dfn{marked}.  Marked entries are displayed using an
underline.  @kbd{S-up} means the @key{shift} key plus the @key{up} key
simultaneously.  It moves the cursor up one line and then toggles the status
of the entry on the destination line, exactly the same as if you had typed
@key{up} followed by @key{RET}.  @kbd{S-down} works analogously for downward
motion.

When there are marked entries, the main menu displays @samp{(4) update
marked}, and the menu item @samp{(u) unmark all} appears.

@item q
Quit out of View mode.

@end table

In the case of View mode after a Query command, typing a number
jumps to the query selection page (skipping the main menu) so that you
can begin another query straight away.  Also, three additional keys are
available to show monthly breakdowns of the query (if applicable), and
to export data.

@table @kbd

@item m
Show last query summarized by month.  The display also includes the
percentages and a horizontal histogram to the right of the summary.  In the
histogram, the largest percentage is represented by 42 "#" characters; the
other values are displayed proportionally.

@item M
Ask for a month range and then display the last query summarized by the
specified months.  Like @code{m}, ETRACK also displays percentages and a
histogram.

A month range has one of two forms: either @code{YYYY-MM}, which indicates one
month; or @code{YYYY-MM,YYYY-MM}, which indicates an inclusive range of
months.  Some examples:

@example
2001-2          February 2001
2001-2,2002-3   February 2001 through March 2003
@end example

@item x
Export data from one of two data sources: marked entries or the results of the
query.  If there are marked entries, ETRACK asks whether you wish to have them
exported.  Type @kbd{y} to confirm, or @kbd{n} to export the query results.

This command works as if you had returned to the main menu and typed @kbd{x m}
or @kbd{x p} there (@pxref{Export Data command}), except that the page number
is computed automatically in the case of @kbd{x p}.
@end table

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Diary Import
@chapter Diary Import
@cindex  Bulk data import
@cindex  Diary format

Aside from interactive usage (@pxref{Session}), it is often more convenient
to record new entries @dfn{offline} and then add them in bulk to the database
at a later time.  This chapter describes the @dfn{diary format} that ETRACK
recognizes, as well as the commands to use, for this purpose.

@section Diary Format

The diary format is a straightforward text format with four columns, each
separated by whitespace (one or more tab or space characters).  The columns
appear left-to-right and are named @code{date}, @code{amount}, @code{attcodes}
and @code{details}, respectively.  More precisely:

@table @code
@item date
The format is @code{YYYY-MM-DD} (numerical year, month and day).
If the numerical value of month or day is less than 10, write it
with a leading @code{0} (zero), for example @code{04} for April.

@item amount
The format is @code{-ABCDE.FG} (digits, minus-sign optional).
You can use however many digits are necessary to the left of the decimal
point --- the five shown here are just an example.  However, to the right of
the decimal point, two digits are always required, for example @code{42.00}.

@item attcodes
The format is one more characters, connected together.  Which particular
characters are valid depends on the database configuration.  You can use the
backend shell command @code{list-attcodes} to see a list:

@example
etrack -b list-attcodes
@end example

Characters in @code{attcodes} are case-sensitive; for example,
@code{s} and @code{S} specify two different attributes.

@item details
The format is one or more @dfn{strings}.  Each string starts and ends with a
double-quote.  Within each string, whitespace at the head or tail is not
permitted, although internal whitespace is ok.  Depending on the database
configuration, the first or second detail may be significant for drill-down
queries (@pxref{query}).  Empty strings are not permitted.
@end table

Here is an example with two entries:

@example
2003-03-23       20.00    f       "torta" "vigoni" "x mamma"
2003-03-27        6.00    sh      "tessera coop"
@end example

In the first entry, there are three strings in the @code{details} column, in
the second, only one.  The columns are separated by multiple spaces.

@section Importing Diary Format Data

You can import diary format data into the database with the
backend shell command @code{import-diary-file}.  There are two invocation
variations, depending on whether you run ETRACK locally or remotely (via ssh).
For the following examples we assume the diary file is named @file{expenses}
in the current working directory (locally).

Local ETRACK invocation:

@example
etrack -b import-diary-file expenses
@end example

Remote ETRACK invocation:

@example
ssh -X REMOTE-HOST etrack -b import-diary-file - < expenses
@end example

Note that the portion @code{etrack -b import-diary-file} is the same for both
local and remote invocations.  For the latter, the @code{- < expenses}
construct arranges for ssh to feed the file to ETRACK using the @dfn{standard
input} channel (and ETRACK will use the term ``standard input'' in messages
instead of the filename).

There are two distinct steps to the import process: validation, which checks
the format of the file; and insertion, which adds entries to the database.

If validation fails, ETRACK does not continue, but instead displays an error
message and lists the line number, reason for failure, and text of the invalid
lines.  ETRACK will also display some format hints, including a list of valid
attcodes, and exits with non-success exit code.  For example:

@example
etrack: Sorry, no entries added to the database due to
        errors encountered in the following lines:

24:     bad details
        2003-02-24        2.00    hs      "spina telefono

192:    bad details (empty)
        2003-02-26       51.94    f       "esselungga" ""

        :
        (etc)
@end example

On the other hand, if validation is completely successful, ETRACK goes ahead
with the insertion.  Note that ETRACK does not check for duplicate insertions;
you need to do that yourself (@pxref{Prune duplicates command}).

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    Maintenance
@chapter Maintenance
@cindex  Database maintenance

Normally, once ETRACK is set up (@pxref{Setup}), operation is driven in
large part by the user (@pxref{Session}).  Occasionally, however, there
arise tasks that require administrator involvement.  This chapter lists
the @code{etrack -b} shell commands available and ends with some short
examples of their usage.

When using the Emacs front end, client encoding is automatically deduced from
language environment (@pxref{Customization}).  For shell command interaction,
however, you may need to explicitly specify how you expect the output to be
encoded with the @code{-E @var{client-encoding}} option (if unspecified the
default is @code{UNICODE}).
For a list of possible @var{client-encoding}s, see section ``Character Set
Support'' in the PostgreSQL documentation.

@section Available commands

Some of the following commands can be very dangerous; be careful!
Most require that a configuration
file be specified (@pxref{Configuration file}).  Two in particular are
interactive: @code{repl} and @code{shell}; the rest do their job,
display their results to stdout, and exit when done.

@verbatiminclude bhelp.texi

@section Usage examples

Dumping an existing database:

@example
etrack -b dump-alist > DUMP
@end example

This writes the contents of table @code{expenses} to file @file{DUMP},
in an alist format.  The alist keys are the table's column names.

Loading data into an existing database:

@example
# NOTE: This does not replace the current data.
etrack -b load-alist-file DUMP
@end example

Note that the "i" field is not preserved when doing @code{load-alist-file}.
@xref{Prune duplicates command}.

Upgrading the database schema (@pxref{DB}):

@example
etrack -b upgrade-db
@end example

Migrating the database to another cluster (@pxref{socket directory}):

@example
etrack -b replicate NEW-DIR
sed '/sockdir/s|. ".*"|. "NEW-DIR"|' CONFIG-FILE > NEW-CONFIG-FILE
@end example

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Design
@chapter Design
@cindex Innards

This chapter describes some of the innards of ETRACK.  The programmer hopes
these explanations are clear enough to reference, critique and improve upon,
later.

@menu
* DB::
* App::
@end menu

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node DB
@section DB
@cindex DB Innards
@cindex Innards, DB

@subsection Quick History

The first two DB design versions had a single table.  Going from version 1 to
version 2 renamed the column @code{catcode} to @code{attcode}.  Version 3
uses type @code{integer} instead of
@code{float} for column @code{amount}.  Version 3 also introduces a simple
table @code{etrackmetainfo} with columns @code{key} and @code{value}, both of
type @code{text}.  Version 4 (the current one, starting with ETRACK 0.999)
adds the table @code{templates}.

@subsection ETRACK Meta Info

Here is the list of keys available in the @code{etrackmetainfo} table:

@table @code
@item *db-design-version*
This is currently "4".
@end table

@subsection Column Definitions for @code{expenses}

The @code{expenses} table is defined like so:

@example
((i       serial)
 (date    timestamp "WITH TIME ZONE" "NOT NULL")
 (amount  integer "NOT NULL")
 (attcode text "NOT NULL")
 (details text[]))
@end example

The @code{templates} table is defined like so:

@example
((name    text "PRIMARY KEY")
 ;; rest similar to table `expenses' but allowing NULL
 (date    timestamp "WITH TIME ZONE")
 (amount  integer)
 (attcode text)
 (details text[]))
@end example

Some schools of database design consider using arrays to be harmful, so while
ETRACK hasn't advanced enough to make/break that point of view just yet, it's
a distinct possibility for the future.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node App
@section App
@cindex App Innards
@cindex Innards, App

From the user's point of view, the application is a single command from Emacs:
@code{M-x etrack}.  This used to start a big synchronous event loop (with many
small internal event loops) described in @ref{Session}.  Nowadays, we use the
(somewhat perfunctory) Etrack major mode.  Other implementation issues:

@itemize
@item
Mouse clicks are not handled, so behavior is dependent on the default
bindings for mouse events (which may or may not be handled correctly).

@item
With respect to the @code{amount} column, Emacs is only aware of
floating point numbers (via @code{string-to-number} in functions
@code{--etrack-collect-new-entry} and @code{--etrack-cmd:update}).
Conversion to/from the @code{integer} type used by the backend is done
by the backend.  This centralizes those conversions at the expense of
numerical safety in the frontend input routines.
@end itemize

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node    License
@chapter License
@cindex  License

ETRACK is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
any later version.

ETRACK is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with GNU Emacs; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the
Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor,
Boston, MA  02110-1301  USA.

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@c ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
@bye

@c etrack.texi ends here
